Coming up next is the Science Fiction Radio Show, so stay with us.
This is the Science Fiction Radio Show, a commentary on science fiction and
fantasy.
And here are your hosts.
This is Bill Vernon and Daryl Lane. Here's Anthony as the author of over 30
science fiction and fantasy novels. His science fiction novels include Thone,
Macroscope, and the Omnivore series. Anthony's fantasy novels include Hassan and
the well-known Xanth series. He's also written what he calls science fantasy.
The best examples of this genre are his cluster novels and the associated three
-volume tarot novel. Since Anthony writes both science fiction and fantasy, we
ask him which one he prefers to write. For the challenge, for the sheer joy of
getting in and tackling a difficult problem and surmounting it, science fiction
is better. But if I need money, it's fantasy. I make my money on fantasy, and
it's very easy to do. So that it depends on what I really want. If I want to do
something that I will feel will live after me and really be worth my effort,
then it is science fiction. But right now I would say, oh, about three-quarters
of my money is being made in a fantasy. So that it is a certain pleasure to be
able to do something like that and just be richly rewarded for it. Not so much
intellectually, but I can't just ignore the financial aspect. It's nice to be
paid well as well. But once he starts writing in either genre, Anthony admits he
enjoys it. Actually, I do enjoy each when I get into it. Whatever genre or
whatever project I get into, I do the very best I can. And I'm generally
satisfied that I've done the best that I can in that particular genre. They're
different thrusts, you might say. Right now, Anthony's fantasy commands a much
larger audience than does his science fiction. For the decade or so that I wrote
science fiction, before I got into fantasy in any big way, I would have sales of
50,000, 60,000 copies, 100,000. And some over the years, some of my better ones
would build up beyond that. I've only been into fantasy for the past five years.
And they're already selling in the quarter million copies of class. I think my
first recent fantasy, A Spell for Chameleon, has now sold about 280,000 copies.
So it's just much bigger than the science fiction, much faster and much more. We
asked Anthony what reason he gives for the popularity of fantasy in general
these days. That's something that a lot of people are speculating on now. And my
answer may be fairly simple and others may not agree with it. For a number of
years, there simply wasn't much market for fantasy. And everybody knew it, so
nobody wrote it. And Delray Books decided to take a plunge and get into fantasy
in a big way. They went out and they tried to get good new authors. They tried
to get old ones to convert over and do serious, well-written fantasy. I was one
of the ones that shifted over from science fiction to fantasy. And apparently it
worked, because now most of the best-selling fantasy is with this one publisher,
Delray Books. And I conjecture that they took the plunge and it worked, that
when fantasy was given the same push that science fiction was, it had the same
success and now is being carried on, perhaps on momentum, beyond the science
fiction levels. Now, most people will tell you there's a deep philosophical
aspect that somehow people crave fantasy when they don't crave science fiction.
But I don't see that the world has changed that much in five years to make
people suddenly crave a genre that they didn't want before. I think, again, the
answer has to be in the commercial aspect, in the push, in the advertising, in
the promotion that they give the novels. I think people just didn't know about
fantasy before. But as I said, this is not an answer most people will give you.
And I'm not sure whether it's accurate. It's just my theory. More with Piers
Anthony on our next show.
This has been the Science Fiction Radio Show, a production of the Permian Basin
Science Fiction Association, produced in conjunction with Odessa College in
Odessa, Texas.
This has been
the
Science Fiction Radio Show,
a production of the Permian Basin Science Fiction Association, of the
Permian Basin Science Fiction Association.
This is the Science Fiction Radio Show, a commentary on science fiction and
fantasy.
And here are your hosts.
This is Daryl Lane. And Bill Vernon. Science fiction and fantasy author Piers
Anthony has written the enormously successful fantasy series, popularly called
the Xanth series. A Spell for Chameleon appeared in September 1977. It tells the
story of Bink, a young man growing up in the enchanted land of Xanth, who is
attempting to discover his unique individual magical ability. A Spell for
Chameleon sets the stage for the succeeding Xanth books. It is an adventure
fantasy loaded with humor, especially puns. When A Spell for Chameleon appeared
in 1977, it was meant to be a standalone novel. However, as Anthony tells us, he
came to write two sequels, The Source of Magic, which appeared in February 1979,
and Castle Rugna, which appeared in July of that year. No, it was no series. It
was an individual novel that I did to try out a publisher and an editor. For all
I knew, it would be just one novel that would never repeat. But then it worked
so well. I liked it, and the editor liked it. You see, this is a two-way street.
The author has to like doing something, but the editor also has to like his
work. So before it was published, the editor said, Will you do another fantasy
for us? And he was not thinking of another in the same framework, and neither
was I. But when I got to thinking about it and working out and trying to find
another fantasy setup, I realized that there was more that I wanted to say about
The Land of Zanth. I sort of liked it. So I asked him if it would be all right
to do another one in that framework, and I think a little bit reluctantly. The
editor agreed, and we did it. And then the thing was almost a bestseller. It did
very well, and that pretty well-established stance of the series, it just kept
on going. We did a third one, said let's wrap it up as a trilogy and not do any
more. But then the readers started demanding more and more and more and more,
and finally both the publisher and the author were... It's hard to say no when
the readers are begging for more, really. And so we have gone along, and it's
been very rewarding, actually. So there's the answer. For those who say Piers
Anthony doesn't know how many books are in a trilogy, it wasn't his intent to
make the Zanth series a trilogy. At this time, Centaur Isle, Ogre Ogre, and
Nightmare have been released, making a total of six in the series. Anthony told
us that the series will probably go on indefinitely. At the time of the
interview, only four Zanth novels had been published. Well, I think of it as an
open-ended series. I've actually written seven. I'm finishing the seventh one
now. I'm actually typing it right now. And I have two more that I'm thinking of.
As you see, there are four in print, but there will be two more coming out later
this year, bringing it up to six. And then the seventh will appear about a year
later. And I think as long as the market holds up, as long as there's demand,
I'll probably do one more Zanth novel a year, just indefinitely. When people get
tired of Zanth and the sales go down, we'll quit. So it really has no end. I
suspect that it may go one novel a year for the next 20 years. I don't know. As
the reader can well imagine, Anthony has a good time writing the Zanth novels. I
say it's not what I regard great literature. It's not terrifically challenging.
But it has two things going for it. One is that it pays very well. And that's
all in a recession like this. It helps to have something you know will pay. And
the other is that it is an awful lot of fun to do. I can just get there and sort
of relax. You know, it's like being at home with your shoes off and just
relaxing and enjoying yourself. I enjoy it more than just about anything else.
But as I said, I like to do something with challenge so that I don't want to do
nothing but Zanth. But in between other novels, it's very nice to come back and
just let myself go and work out puns, puns that nobody else would tolerate in
Zanth. They're all right. And I probably enjoy writing them as much as my
readers enjoy reading them. More about Piers Anthony on our next show.
This has been the Science Fiction Radio Show, a production of the Permian Basin
Science Fiction Association, produced in conjunction with Odessa College in
Odessa, Texas.
This has been the Science Fiction Radio Show.
Coming up next is the Science Fiction Radio Show, so stay with us.
This is the Science Fiction Radio Show, a commentary on science fiction and
fantasy.
And here are your hosts.
This is Bill Vernon. And Daryl Lane. Science fiction and fantasy author Piers
Anthony has over 40 novels to his credit. One of his best series is the Cluster
Series, which Anthony calls Science Fantasy. It began as a designed trilogy
comprising Cluster, Chaining the Lady, and Curly and Quest, but two additional
related novels have been added to the list, Thousand Star and Viscous Circle.
Central to this series of novels is the Tarot Religion, a much more
sophisticated version of the Tarot fortune-telling cards, which have been around
hundreds of years. Anthony informed us that while he was researching the Cluster
novels, he came across an interesting group who used Tarot cards. Here he tells
us how material he got from that group got included in the Cluster novels. I was
doing the research. See, I work ahead. And so I was doing research and looking
at things and just studying things in general. I like to say now, I learn more
each year than I ever did in school or college just because I like knowledge.
And so I was working on the Cluster novels at this time. And this material
suddenly gave a new direction to it. So I put in Tarot scenes, one major scene,
one chapter in each of the Cluster novels. It had not originally been there. And
I built, I merged the frameworks. Tarot is in the Cluster framework and the
Tarot material appears in the Cluster novels. It was a kind of amazing, you
might say, of two ideas, the Tarot idea and the framework that I had already
developed for the Cluster novels. When the Cluster trilogy was completed,
Anthony digressed to show the origin and original tenets of the Tarot religion.
The books making up this history are God of Tarot, Vision of Tarot, and Faith of
Tarot. But be aware that this is not a trilogy, although some reviewers have
called it so. It is actually one long novel which was broken into three volumes,
much to Anthony's displeasure. It was one quarter million word novel. I wrote it
in one piece. And a publisher balked at size. I don't know why. In mainstream,
people can get quarter million word novels published and they're best sellers.
But in science fiction, they wouldn't do it for me. They insisted on breaking it
up. Well, my agent and I fought this. We even went to the extent of taking about
a 30% cut in the payment for the sole reason to have it published as one novel.
So they gave us the, I think they offered $15,000 and they cut it to $11,500 for
it and signed the agreement that they would publish it as one novel. Whereupon,
they broke it up into three. They didn't give me back the money. And a publisher
published the first third of it and went out of business. That was Jove. Jove
was brought out by the combine that, you know, Berkeley was part of. Berkeley
went ahead, published the other two novels in a different year so that I
couldn't even get my novel published in one year. It bothered me because I feel
that this is the major novel of my career. Split into three parts and divided
between two years. It washed me out totally. I had no chance to make a run for
any awards or anything like that. It was simply gone, which is what tends to
happen to my more important work. So I'm rather put out about this because I
felt the major work of my career was virtually destroyed by the publisher. Not
that the publisher set out to do that, but I mean by the publisher going out of
business right in the middle of my novel by refusing to honor the original
commitment. Part of the agreement was when they finally broke it up, I had them
sign a paper saying, all right, if you've got to break it up, you've got to, but
never will this be referred to as a trilogy because it's not. See, when I write
a novel, it's complete. I tie up the loose ends. And to publish a third of a
novel and then call it a full novel in itself, that's just not the way I write.
Other people write that way. I'm aware of it. I don't. I like to wrap up my
loose ends. As it happened, I saw a review of it, the first third. The reviewer
never even realized it was only a third of a novel. So apparently, he's used to
seeing these fragments. More about Piers Anthony on our next show.
This has been the Science Fiction Radio Show, a production of the Permian Basin
Science Fiction Association, produced in conjunction with Odessa College in
Odessa, Texas.
Masters of the Patricule entendu in
Coming up next is the Science Fiction Radio Show, so stay with us.
This is the Science Fiction Radio Show, a commentary on science fiction and
fantasy.
And here are your hosts.
This is Daryl Lane and Bill Vernon. Science fiction and fantasy author Piers
Anthony has been writing in these genres since the mid-60s. Anthony's apparent
production was fairly low until 1977, when his work began appearing with
increasing frequency. Right. Since that apparently sudden explosion of effort in
1977, some 18 Anthony volumes have appeared in print for the first time. But
Anthony did not suddenly begin writing at a brisker pace. He told us that he had
been blacklisted by the publishing industry in the early 70s because he had
insisted on being paid fairly for his first published novel, Thone. The
explosion of his works in print in 1977 was a result of his overcoming the
blacklisting. Here Anthony explains. I could only sell a portion of what I
wrote. In fact, I was writing it. I piled up eight novels unsold so that in the
70s, say, 50% of my output was getting into print. But when I finally got
through that, it finally became apparent to some of these publishers that I was
the one that was right, you see. See, the word was being spread by the
blacklisters how difficult a writer I was to deal with and don't deal with this
guy and so on. It's just nothing but trouble. When I finally, when that passed
and I got to working with editors who knew me personally and knew it wasn't so,
then I could sell everything I wrote. So now you're seeing everything I write.
And it looks like an explosion, but I always was writing at that pace. I just
couldn't get it into print. Piers Anthony is actually a nom de plume utilizing
only the author's first and second names. When we asked Anthony why he uses a
pen name, we found out it's due to some long-range planning. I decided on that
before I ever sold a thing. And I said, supposing I write, and just supposing
I'm successful, and just supposing I get to be famous. Now, all of this was an
awful lot of supposing. I mean, I hadn't even sold anything. I'd been trying for
several years and hadn't. I've heard about writers such as John D. MacDonald, a
mystery writer, and he had to move several times because people would come in
and just drop in. They would assume that he had nothing better to do than to
talk with every fan that dropped in on his address. And so he would have to move
so his address would be lost. It would take him two or three years to find him,
and then they'd take up his time again. And why have this happen to me if I ever
get that well-known? The answer was to use the pen name. So I set up with the
pen name from the outset, and it has protected me. I get a lot of fan mail. It
goes through the publisher. I don't get many people dropping in on me because
they can't find me. They can look up in the phone book. There is, I don't know,
maybe there's somebody locally called Anthony that keeps getting people dropping
in on him. It's not me, you see. So I have protected myself. If I want someone
to know who I am, I can tell them. But the stranger that just says, hey, gee,
there's this writer. I think I'll drop in on him. He is unable to find me. And
so now I'm beginning to approach the sort of success that the pseudonym was
prepared for. I really never thought I would get there. It was just saying
suppose. And I planned well. I'm having more success than I really believed I
would have. And now my pen name is serving to protect me, to protect my time,
really. It's not that I mind talking with people. But, you know, there would be
a lot of people that would just like to come. If there's a writer there, they
won't even have read anything by that author. They say, gee, that's a writer.
I'll go talk to him. But I don't need that sort of thing. I'm willing to talk to
people that have read my works, that want to talk to me, ask me intelligent
questions. And that people more like you, you see, I'm not willing to talk to
the man off the street who just has heard that I'm a writer. He doesn't even
know what I'm writing about. But if there's a writer, he just wants to go and
talk to him and take up his time. So that's the reason, again, a rather
commercial reason, if you will. But I think it's effective. We'll have more
about Piers Anthony on our next show.
This has been the Science Fiction Radio Show, a production of the Permian Basin
Science Fiction Association, produced in conjunction with Odessa College in
Odessa, Texas.
We'll see you next time.
Coming up next is the Science Fiction Radio Show, so stay with us.
This is the Science Fiction Radio Show, a commentary on science fiction and
fantasy.
And here are your hosts.
This is Bill Vernon. And Daryl Lane. The prolific science fiction and fantasy
author Piers Anthony is often outspoken, and once he was even blacklisted by the
publishing community. Anthony is a man with strong principles. One of his
principles is that he responds to fan mail. It's a funny thing. I've never gone
to a convention. I've never met people personally that way, mainly because I
don't like to travel and I do like to write. But I do answer my mail. Yesterday,
I, yesterday, sorry. For last month, I simply went back and counted up the
letters I had written. It was 64 letters. I had to take off all weekends just to
answer my fan mail. This is a problem. If it gets much worse, I'm going to have
to start slacking off on that because it takes me too long to finish a novel if
I have to keep taking time off to answer the letters. But I am responsive. I do
read them. I think about them. Each is an individual letter relating to what the
fan has told me, what his needs are. One reason Anthony feels so strongly about
responding to fan mail is that many of those who write him are children. You
see, many of my letters are from children, 9, 10, 11, 12 years old. And I think
it's very important to them that I do answer them. When I was that age, I didn't
like to be ignored when something was important to me. So I try to, it's the
golden rule, I try to treat them as I wish I had been treated. And I don't, you
might say, well, what does a guy 10 years old have to tell me? Well, actually,
he can tell me how he feels, how he reacts, how important it is, and what
influence my novelist had on him. He will do so with a lot more candor than an
adult will because he's not trying to impress me. He's just telling me what he
likes. He doesn't have the art to be, you know, for duplicity. So that it's a
little like animal psychology. You can see the human motives in animals because
the animals don't know enough to conceal them. So I value these letters. I
sometimes wish I just had more time, if I could have full time for writing and
also full time for answering letters. So there is, it's been mostly this year,
considerable correspondence developing. And I would say 50 or 60 percent of it
is by people under the age of, say, 18. It's mostly young readers that I get.
Piers Anthony has a strong philosophical motive for writing. Making a living is
part of the motive, but it's not the whole thing, or even the most important
part. I'd just like to think that I'm on Earth for some purpose other than just
to feed my face. I want to do something and try to leave the universe a better
place than it was when I came into it. If there's anything in my power I can do
to improve things, then I want to do it. And I try to do this through the
ability that I have, as a writer. And so I want to write, in the guise of
fiction, to write material that people will read and become better persons or
get ideas that they wouldn't have. I've had some comments from fans saying that
after reading some of my novels, they're thinking of the Split Infinity series,
they've decided that honesty is the best policy. Now they admire honesty. Well,
that pleases me. That's the kind of thing I want to do. If a person was planning
to be dishonest and he reads one of my novels and then he decides that he really
would rather be honest, I believe in honesty. I want to encourage it. I think
there should be more of it in the world. So I am trying to have a beneficial
effect, you might say, to justify my own existence. I'm making money at it, yes.
But while I'm making the money, I also want to do something that, well, when I
die, I can look back and say, I have done something useful in the world. So this
is why I'm not satisfied just to write and get paid for it and not to worry
about the theme or the content. I want to do something that I can be satisfied
with, that I can be proud of, and that will help people.
This has been the Science Fiction Radio Show, a production of the Permian Basin
Science Fiction Association, produced in conjunction with Odessa College in
Odessa, Texas. You're a
Milkman Science Fiction tool, a production of the Permian Basin Science Fiction
Association,